---
layout: post
title: What's New in RestfulX 1.3.1
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 02 January 2011 - Vancouver, BC

h1. Overview

# <a href="#dynamic-schema">Dynamic schema updates for SQLite in Adobe AIR</a>
# <a href="#recursive">Recursive deletes for SQLite in Adobe AIR</a>
# <a href="#native">Native AMF components removed</a>
# <a href="#bug-fixes">Bug fixes</a>

h2. <a name="dynamic-schema">SQLite dynamic schema updates</a>

You can now keep your SQLite database up-to-date with your RestfulX model changes. Simply set 
@Rx.airEnableDatabaseMigrations = true@ in your initialization function and RestfulX will add any new properties you add to your model files as columns to your underlying SQLite database.

There are some caveats though. SQLite supports a very limited version of @ALTER TABLE@ so you can add new columns but not much else. See 
"SQLite ALTER TABLE specification":http://www.sqlite.org/lang_altertable.html for more details. In reality this is good enough for incremental updates to your DB and if you do a major update of your app that requires stale columns to be removed and data moved around (columns renamed), you can do so in a custom upgrade procedure using @XRx.air().executeAnySQL@.

h2. <a name="recursive">SQLite recursive deletes</a>

@AIRServiceProvider@ now fully complies with @IServiceProvider@ interface and honours @{recusrive: true}@ flag. Recursive deletes where originally meant only as a pass-through feature for fully-featured back-ends such as Rails but this is something that's also useful in a local-client environment so @AIRServiceProvider@ also supports it now.

h2. <a name="native">No more native AMF</a>

After some benchmarking and optimization for the pure AMF serializer that comes with the framework native AMF components are no longer bundled. Pure AMF serializer is just as fast as the native AMF serializer was and should be used in place of native AMF serializer. This should also eliminate installation problems people have reported on various Windows/Linux platforms as the gem is once again pure Ruby.

h2. <a name="bug-fixes">Bug fixes</a>

For a list of bugs fixed in this release refer to "bugs fixed":http://github.com/dima/restfulx_framework/issues/closed.

Thanks a lot to everyone who submitted patches for this release. Your contributions are very much appreciated!